One of the more controversial views of the animal liberation movement is the condemnation of zoos - public gardens full of amazing and exotic animals, where curious adults and children alike go to marvel at the incredible diversity of life and nature. Although the history of the zoo may be widely viewed as morally questionable, full of barred cages and stark conditions for animals ruthlessly poached from the wild, zoos today now have impressive enclosures designed to emulate animals’ natural habitats as closely as possible, and they espouse strong justifications for keeping these creatures in captivity - namely as a means of public education and preservation of endangered species. How can anyone but a miserable cynic not enjoy the previously unattainable experience of being face-to-face with a silverback gorilla while also contributing to the great cause of perpetuating the threatened existence of its kind? In this paper, I will analyze the ethical problems underlying zoos, first arguing that the most robust and common argument in favor of them fails, and moreover that the presence and character of the viewer as an essential component of the zoo is what makes the entire concept immoral and wholly unjustifiable.[1]
To the point, the fact that these rationalizations are used so widely in the context of zoos implies some presumption that it is wrong to keep animals in captivity for no reason; arguments are rarely found in favor, for example, of the reinstatement of royal menageries, where animals were caged and displayed purely for the enjoyment and status signaling of wealthy humans. To restrict the basic liberties of a being, there must be strong reasons to do so, at least according to convention, thus zoos must explain why it is permissible for them and not for private individuals to hold a large collection of undomesticated animals in captivity.[2] Most accredited zoos have significant portions of their websites devoted to explaining their “mission”; Woodland Park Zoo claims they are “saving wildlife,” San Diego Zoo is “committed to saving species around the world,” the Minnesota Zoo is “a leader in the conservation of animals and their habitats,” and so on. But many animals kept in zoos are not endangered at all - grizzly bears, porcupines, meerkats, and many more animals commonly retained in zoos hold the conservation status of “least concern” and have no need for preservation, so there is no reason to hold them captive at the very least, and yet zoos continue to do so.
In addition, it is unclear why a paying audience is necessary for these conservation programs. In fact it seems that the presence of visitors would only serve to detract from the zoo’s efforts in several ways: it introduces safety and liability concerns, it requires funding unnecessary events, tours, and features, and most importantly, it fundamentally changes animal behavior and, I argue, the character of the animal itself.
Human visitors are an inseparable part of the zoo experience (otherwise it would not be a zoo but a sanctuary, wildlife reserve, or something of the sort), and being perpetually under surveillance means that these animals are never really free to indulge in completely unrestrained, natural behaviors, barring nighttime when they sleep in holding areas that are a far cry from their habitats in the wild. So when a zoo-goer gazes upon an endangered blue-eyed black lemur and the lemur is aware of being gazed upon, the person is not really seeing how a wild lemur behaves but how a member nominally of the same species behaves in captivity. Along with the fact that animals in zoos often have very different traits from their wild counterparts due to consequences of captive breeding, this raises the question of whether the zoo lemur is really the same thing as the wild lemur at all. It would arguably be better to simply stop breeding the zoo lemur, mourn the loss of the wild blue-eyed black lemur, and do better in the future to prevent human-caused habitat loss so we will not be in this predicament again; as Dale Jamieson puts it, there is a “peculiar moral schizophrenia of a culture that drives a species to the edge of extinction and then romanticizes the remnants.” (Jamieson 2011, 178) This is especially strengthened by the fact that the lemur species has no consciousness of its own or ability to perceive its extinction (and neither do the individuals), but the actual lemurs being held in captivity in zoos do suffer their personal losses of liberty. Due to these considerations, I believe we have a stronger moral duty towards the individual lemurs than we do toward the human-defined concept of its “species,” so it appears that the preservation argument is not strong enough to justify the existence of zoos. But are they actually wrong, and if so, why?
To begin to answer this question, it is helpful to delve into our true motivations for keeping animals in zoos, if we accept that it cannot be for the purpose of species preservation as I have argued. In order to figure this out, we should ponder the nature of the zoo: the “main attractions” are not endangered frogs or snails, but “fun” animals such as giraffes, bears, and lions, the animals’ enclosures are designed to encourage them to spend their time in areas visible to visitors, events such as feeding are centered around human enjoyment (visitors can sometimes pay extra to feed the animals themselves), and “cute” baby animals are one of the zoo’s main selling points, used as advertisements on their websites and newsletters. Going to a zoo, one can observe that visitors do not spend the bulk of their time reading the educational placards or learning about the causes of extinction, but instead seeking out animals performing some impressive or silly act; if an animal is out of sight or being “boring,” the exhibit is empty. Thus the unfortunate truth, as we can see from all of this, is that zoos are for human entertainment, and to pretend otherwise is to be willfully ignorant.
Here lies the ethical problem with zoos - for the mere purpose of amusement, they place ultimate restrictions on healthy animals’ liberties, determine every aspect of their lives, subject them to constant surveillance, entirely seize their privacy and autonomy, and impose human standards on their way of life (with visitors often calling them “dirty” or “gross” for engaging in natural behaviors such as defecation). In doing so, zoos reinforce the notion of human superiority and encourage the objectification of nonhuman animals. When zoo-goers look at the animals and see that they are under their control, and do not allow them to escape their gaze, and watch them undergo their confinement, having fun and laughing at their “silliness,” they erase the animals’ individuality and reduce them to objects that exist purely for human pleasure, that we can consume as we please and put away when we are done. Acampora compares zoos to prisons, aptly describing them as “institution[s] of power whose specific functions are to display and preserve biotic energies organized in such a way as to become resources for human pleasure and entertainment.” (Acampora 2005, 78)
This highlights the difference between respectfully viewing a subject and exploitatively viewing an object: a respectful viewer looks at it as an end in itself, with appreciation for it as a unique individual with its own life, goals, and preferences, while an exploitative (or oppressive)[3] viewer looks at it as a resource or thing to be conquered, with value only insofar as it can provide the viewer with something. Marilyn Frye characterizes these as the “loving eye” and the “arrogant eye,” writing that “The loving eye does not make that object of perception into something edible, does not try to assimilate it, does not reduce it to the size of the seer’s desire, fear and imagination, and hence does not have to simplify. It knows the complexity of the other as something which will forever present new things to be known.” (Frye 1983, 76)
An important concept to illustrate the difference between these types of views and to determine which is utilized in the context of zoos is that of “otherness.” Each person has a conception of oneself as distinct from others, and there is general agreement that everything that exists is not the same as anything else that has ever existed. Those who employ an oppressive gaze, however, see differences between individuals as moral distinctions rather than simple facts of being, and then construct unjustified hierarchies on the basis of some morally irrelevant differences that are then used to relegate the “other” beings to a position of inferiority and exert domination over them. With this eye, everything acts as the viewer expects it to act, because he refuses to see it any other way. Contrary to this, the respectful viewer acknowledges the differences between beings and even celebrates them, appreciating that others possess traits which she does not and vice versa, and it is the existence of these differences that make the world an interesting and complex place to live in, without placing herself or any being “above” or “below” another.
Zoos participate in the coercive “othering” of animals by putting them on display in order for humans to scrutinize, ridicule, amuse themselves with, and consequently become convinced of their superiority over them. Jamieson points out a study finding that, at a zoo in Buffalo, the most common expressions used to describe animals were “cute,” “funny-looking,” “lazy,” “dirty,” “weird,” and “strange,” almost all of which express either negative or aberrant traits. (Jamieson 2011, 169) Due to this “othering” and their status as objects of entertainment, animals in a zoo are clearly being viewed exploitatively - they appear to have solely instrumental value, because as I previously stated, the fraction of their lives when they get to enjoy being outside, closest to their natural state, and when they are physically freest (in their daytime enclosures) is only when they are being gazed upon and made use of, and in this way the viewer is an essential part of the zoo and the animals’ lives. Because the zoo-goers play this central role, and because they employ an exploitative gaze, the zoo as it functions today is an unethical institution of oppression.
An objection to this line of reasoning might be that there is no wrongdoing if the animals do not understand or care that they are being laughed at or thought of as inferior by their viewers; it would be wrong to do this to a human who can conceive of dignity and subjugation and such, but as clueless creatures, animals care only to satisfy their instinctual needs and cannot possibly distinguish between being viewed respectfully or not.
My response to this is that the ethical offense is not necessarily in the nature of the gaze per se,[4] but in the attitude underlying and perpetuated by this gaze; that is, it serves to construct a value hierarchy and justify the subordination of nonhuman animals through sanctioning human domination. By restraining animals’ lives and liberties through cages and enclosures, zoos send the message to visitors that humans possess these animals; no matter how strong the gorilla or how fast the cheetah, we are able to conquer them, subject them to our wishes and whims, and ultimately hold dominion over them in every facet of their lives. By participating in “othering,” zoos encourage visitors to define “human” as “that which is not animal,” creating a false dualism that places inequitable value on the divide between these realms and gives way to hierarchical thinking. Thus simply the act of watching the animal in a zoo, knowing that it is unable to escape the viewer’s gaze and yet still taking delight in the activity, is blatant exploitation and a manifestation of the belief that humans are superior to animals, they belong to us, and it is permissible to do whatever we desire with them, including placing them in a zoo for our entertainment. This objectifying and subordinating attitude toward animals which is promoted in zoos is morally unacceptable, and conceiving of animals as “ours” is a dangerous path leading to their abuse at the hands of humans, which we can see overwhelming evidence of in factory farms, research labs, and other such institutions.
In conclusion, the real tragedy of zoos is not only that they are breeding sites for human arrogance and animal oppression, but also that they dishonestly defend themselves with claims of helping the very animals who they are harming, by “preserving their species.” Instead of disclosing their intentions and purpose as centers of entertainment (not to say that it would be acceptable if they were to do so), zoos continue to project an image of moral purity in order to maintain their existence, leading visitors to believe that in fact they are doing a good thing by taking part in the subjugation of animals, and this is a deeply troubling perception. The truth of the matter is that any justification in favor of zoos will always fail because at their very core, they function as places in which to objectify and oppress beings for the sake of providing amusement, and this can never be permissible.
