In his early 20th century essay “Knowledge by Description and Knowledge by Acquaintance,” Bertrand Russell argues that proper names are actually disguised definite descriptions that do not contain any references. He was motivated to create this theory in an effort to solve several puzzles concerning the ways we use and understand language: how can negative existential statements or those regarding non-existent individuals carry any meaning? How can we gain new information from identity statements? Why can’t we substitute two names with the same reference for one another in all cases and maintain the truth value of the sentence? Russell believed that his theory provided the answers to these questions in a way that preserved reality and logic, but P.F. Strawson set out to refute this account and instead offer a view in line with ordinary language philosophy in his 1950 paper “On Referring,” in which he criticizes Russell for ignoring the distinction between the meaning, use, and utterance of a sentence or expression, and for claiming that using a definite description entails a uniquely existential claim. In this paper, I will begin by reconstructing Russell’s argument, illustrating his analysis of definite descriptions along with Strawson’s critique of this view and his own account of reference. I will then argue that of the two, Strawson makes the better case for how we can solve the puzzles mentioned above while still paying close attention to the way that we actually use language; this argument is preferable because it provides a more complete picture of definite descriptions by including the important distinction between meaning and use and substituting implication for the notion of assertion, and some examples will show that Russell’s theory falls short where Strawson’s does not.
        Much of Russell’s paper is devoted to his argument that we can only know things through direct acquaintance with our sense-data, concepts, and possibly ourselves. Out of this we can gain further knowledge by description (e.g. if we are told that an object which we have never encountered before has a certain list of properties), but it is important for him that this must ultimately come from direct acquaintance. Due to this consideration, he concludes that “every proposition which we can understand must be composed wholly of constituents with which we are acquainted,” (Russell 1910, 117) otherwise it would be unintelligible to us. His primary targets in this piece are definite descriptions, such as ‘the last ruler of the Ptolemaic Kingdom,’ and proper names such as Cleopatra - in fact, Russell claims that ‘Cleopatra’ is really a definite description (as are all proper names), perhaps ‘the last ruler of the Ptolemaic Kingdom’ or even ‘the woman whose name was Cleopatra.’ This is because, while we cannot possibly be directly acquainted with the person herself, and he rejects the theory that we are acquainted with some idea of her, all of the constituents of the expression ‘the woman whose name was Cleopatra’ are things with which we can be acquainted, that is, the concepts of womanhood and naming, and the noise or shape of ‘Cleopatra’ which we know through sense-data. Russell then uses these claims to show that no name actually refers to any object itself, but rather they are all composed of descriptions that eventually accumulate enough properties to pick out one entity, which is how we can use names and definite descriptions to denote something, but a true reference does not occur except for when we use the logically proper names ‘this’ and ‘that.’ (Russell 1910, 119-21)
        Furthermore, Russell argues that a proposition containing a definite description has a hidden logical form which is not revealed through its grammar. For example, the sentence ‘The queen of unicorns has a golden horn’ is in fact a conjunction of three assertions: (a) there exists at least one queen of unicorns, (b) there exists at most one queen of unicorns, and (c) whoever is the queen of unicorns has a golden horn. This serves two purposes for Russell: first of all, it demonstrates his point that sentences do not contain references, because it turns out that the original statement that appeared to refer is really comprised of a series of claims about properties, and the queen of unicorns herself is not a constituent of the proposition. Secondly, this solves the puzzle regarding how it is possible for a statement about a non-existent object to be significant. Russell believes that the statement ‘The queen of unicorns has a golden horn’ should come out false because the queen of unicorns does not exist, but the problem is that although we know that the phrase does not correspond to anything, it still seems meaningful in some way since we can understand it. What Russell’s analysis shows us is that because the statement is really a conjunction of the three claims listed above, it comes out false instead of meaningless on the basis that (a) is false. According to him, all of these such sentences containing empty definite descriptions will possess a negative truth value. (Russell 1910, 121-3)
This also provides a solution to the puzzle about how negative existential statements are meaningful, because ‘The queen of unicorns does not have a golden horn’ can be read as ‘It is not the case that there exists a queen of unicorns that has a golden horn,’ which is true. Russell’s theory solves the other puzzles as well: identity statements give us new information because they tell us that two different definite descriptions pick out the same object and this object has the properties expressed in both descriptions, and we cannot substitute co-referring terms because they are different descriptions.
However, Strawson offers a striking critique of this theory, claiming that Russell has ignored the crucial distinction between the meaning, use, and utterance of a sentence or expression. On this account, what can be said of the meaning of a sentence or expression is “the rules, habits, conventions governing its correct use, on all occasions, to refer or to assert,” (Strawson 1950, 327) while we say different things about a particular utilization of it to make a reference or assertion, and neither of these is the same as what can be said of the verbal or written utterance. For example, if we consider the sentence ‘You are lovely,’ we can see that what we would say about its meaning is perhaps that it must be used to refer to the person that the speaker is addressing, and that it is generally a compliment, and so on, but it would be ridiculous to try to determine its truth value independent of any specific use of it; the sentence itself is neither true nor false until someone actually states it to someone who may or may not in fact be lovely. This means that  “the question of whether a sentence or expression is significant or not has nothing whatever to do with the question of whether the sentence, uttered on a particular occasion, is, on that occasion, being used to make a true-or-false assertion or not, or of whether the expression is, on that occasion, being used to refer to, or mention, anything at all.” (Strawson 1950, 327-8) Strawson explains that an expression can be used to refer to any number of things (particularly illustrative are the examples ‘I’ and ‘you’ or ‘this’ and ‘that’) and a sentence can have a different truth value depending on the context in which it was uttered.
In addition to this criticism, Strawson disagrees with Russell that propositions are conjunctions of three assertions (an existential claim, a uniqueness claim, and an ascription of properties). Rather, he argues that these are merely implications or presuppositions, meaning that if someone utters the sentence ‘The queen of unicorns has a golden horn,’ this could certainly be evidence that the speaker believes that there is one and only one queen of unicorns, and that whoever it is has a golden horn, but it does not entail that the speaker believes all of these. Strawson thinks that this can be shown by imagining your own response to such an assertion - it is more likely that you would respond not by saying ‘That is false,’ but instead something like ‘Unicorns do not exist,’ which is closer to a reason for why the question of truth or falsity did not come up than it is a contradiction to the original statement. From this we can see that the sentence is significant even though it is not true or false itself but can be used to make a true or false proposition. These considerations lead Strawson to conclude that propositions containing empty definite descriptions simply fail to refer and therefore have no truth value because there is nothing to analyze the statement by, which contrasts with Russell’s view that these sentences are always false by virtue of the falsity of the existential claim. (Strawson 1950, 329-34)
Strawson, in further disagreement with Russell, believes that we do indeed manage to refer to things in the world, and explains how we do so depending on the amount of descriptive content in an expression, its context-dependence, and the type of conventions governing its use. According to him, to make a unique reference we use devices to show both that a reference is intended and what it is we are intending to refer to. Expressions with more descriptive content, such as ‘the author of Walden,’ are also more context-independent, so we can successfully refer if we are correctly using the expression as its meaning dictates. On the other hand, names with no descriptive content, such as Henry David Thoreau, may have their own conventions that have nothing to do with the language (e.g. the social rules of naming), and words like ‘it’ are completely dependent on context to refer. Descriptions that function as names, such as ‘The Red Wedding,’ occupy an in-between position. (Strawson 1950, 335-40)
Moving forward to my own analysis of these theories, I believe that the more compelling interpretation of definite descriptions is Strawson’s. First of all, I find his philosophical methodology to be preferable because he begins from a more fair-minded starting point by examining the ways that we use language and then making a judgment from here, whereas Russell seems to begin his evaluation from the top down, that is, with a conclusion that he wants to reach, and then he finds an argument to make the evidence fit. This can be clearly seen in his attempt to affix a logical structure and truth value to every sentence where it simply doesn’t belong. I think that he has gone wrong particularly in his focus on ensuring that all sentences containing empty definite descriptions come out false, and as Strawson points out, he fails to take into account the fact that a sentence or expression can have significance without having a truth value or reference, because they still have rules governing their correct usage that can be understood apart from any one use. It seems closer to reality to say that language does not exactly fit formal logic in the way that Russell wants it to, and sentences or expressions do not have truth values or references until they are put to use for the purpose of making a proposition or trying to refer to something. For example, it does not make sense to say that the sentence ‘The black cat is in the bathtub’ is either true or false on its own; rather, it can be used in a particular instance to make a true or false claim, just like the expression ‘the black cat’ does not refer to one specific black cat but could refer to any number of black cats depending on the context.
Similarly, I think that Russell’s theory faces a significant problem that Strawson highlights when it comes to the uniqueness claim. Under his view, a speaker uttering the sentence ‘The black cat is in the bathtub’ would be, by using the word ‘the,’ making the assertions that there is one and only one black cat, and that it is in the bathtub. However, I think it is easy to see that this is not what the speaker means to say at all, but it is still a perfectly reasonable and intelligible proposition most likely making a reference to one black cat in particular that would be understood (or perhaps not if the speaker fails to refer) based on the context in which it was uttered. Under Russell’s theory, the entire proposition would have to be false because the uniqueness claim is false (there surely exists more than one black cat), but this is definitely not a desirable outcome because it means that we can never use these common sentences and make a true proposition unless we make the description so definite that it can only pick out the one black cat we wish to speak of, which would make language much more cumbersome than necessary. This example also shows that Strawson’s argument for presupposition is stronger than Russell’s for entailment, because it does not face the same problems if by making this statement we are only implying a uniqueness claim, so the sentence can still come out as true under Strawson’s view. Finally, presupposition survives the negation of a statement while entailment may not, because if I say ‘It is not the case that the queen of unicorns has a golden horn,’ Russell alleges that this should be true, but it could be interpreted as ‘There exists one and only one queen of unicorns and she does not have a golden horn,’ which is not the conclusion that he wants. If by making the claim we are only implying that there exists one and only one queen of unicorns and she does not have a golden horn, it could be true or false depending on the intention of the assertion.
In sum, I have outlined and explained Russell’s theory of definite descriptions and Strawson’s assessment of it along with his view of how sentences and references work from an ordinary language perspective. I have argued that Strawson’s bottom-up approach works better due to its attention to context and preservation of reality, the way it attractively fits several examples, and the more holistic depiction of language that it gives us. Although Russell manages to skew evidence in order to force his theory to solve the puzzles in the way that he wants to, Strawson’s account is a more natural and intuitive way of understanding how names and descriptions function, and it provides resolutions to the same puzzles, so we should prefer this theory even though it means that we may not be able to place an exact logic on language.
