It’s easy to grasp the concept that people often manage to communicate things without actually saying them explicitly, and in fact we rely on this mechanism more than we might realize - such as when a coworker asks how your day is going and you respond, ‘Well, it’s Monday.’ Although all you really stated was an obvious and seemingly trivial fact about the current day’s position in the sequence of the week, your coworker will probably take your true meaning to be something along the lines of, ‘Nothing particularly atrocious has happened, but I am experiencing the usual displeasure of a Monday that I must return to work for the next five days.’ But how does she pick up on this from what you said, and how did you know that she would? It seems rather puzzling that, in light of the meaning of the sentence ‘Well, it’s Monday’ on its face, someone could glean so much more information than what was directly disclosed, and yet we do use sentences in this manner all the time and we do intend for our audiences to pick up on words we wanted to suggest but never said.
This is what Paul Grice tackles in “Logic and Conversation,” in which he explains how we are able to make these leaps in understanding from what is said to what is meant, through the nature of conversation as a cooperative activity between parties that are displaying rational behavior and even obeying certain definable rules. Grice calls these non-straightforward intentions “implicatures” and discusses his view of how these are made generally, along with breaking down different types and their origins in the structure of conversation. In this paper, I will first reconstruct Grice’s argument for his theory of implicatures by describing his classification of conventional and conversational implicatures and explaining his maxims of conversation and why he believes these allow us to generate implicatures. Then I will draw on Jennifer Saul’s paper “Speaker Meaning, What is Said, and What is Implicated” in order to offer an analysis of Grice’s theory that endorses his view for the most part but expands upon it to include the further categories of utterer-implicature and audience-implicature.
In order to get a hold on what Grice believes, it will be helpful to differentiate between his ideas of what a speaker says, what is conventionally implicated, and what is conversationally implicated. First of all, he gives a technical definition of what it means to say something, maintaining at the beginning of his paper that he intends “what someone has said to be closely related to the conventional meaning of the words (the sentence) he has uttered.” This is rather vague and leaves some room for interpretation, but he goes on to explain his meaning a little more by saying that if an audience has a grasp of the language being spoken and believes the speaker to be expressing herself literally, then they will be able to know something about what she has said regardless of their knowledge of the circumstances in which the sentence was uttered. (Grice 1989, 25) For example, if a speaker utters ‘I have to go see a man about a horse’, what she has actually said is something close to the literal meaning of what her sentence has expressed, so perhaps that she is leaving the conversation and her purpose is to visit a man to make an inquiry regarding a horse (although the audience might need more contextual information to know exactly what she is saying, such as the details of which man and which horse). This fairly narrow and ambiguous notion is all that Grice offers in this paper as to his thoughts on what a speaker says, but it becomes more apparent as he continues to explain his conceptions of implicatures, which can be compared with this to elucidate the distinction.
Implicature, according to Grice, can be divided into two types: conventional and conversational. Conventional implicatures are when “the conventional meaning of the words will determine what is implicated.” In these cases, an audience will only need the features of the sentence itself to figure out what the implicature is, and no context or other conversational elements will be necessary. Grice’s example is a sentence in which someone uses ‘therefore’ to imply that one trait follows from another, so something like ‘She’s a philosopher; therefore she speaks nonsense’ would imply that the subject of the sentence speaks nonsense because she is a philosopher, but this was never explicitly said under Grice’s definition of saying. (Grice 1989, 25-6) Another example is the use of ‘but’ to imply contrast: ‘She’s a philosopher, but she speaks truly’ implies that the properties of being a philosopher and speaking truly are typically at odds with each other without ever saying it.
However, Grice’s main point in his paper is related to conversational implicatures. These are “essentially connected with certain general features of discourse,” so rather than being generated by the meaning of the words, they come about due to aspects of conversation. This kind of meaning is more complex (or rather, Grice provides a more complex explanation of it) than what is said and what is conventionally implicated, but it begins with the Cooperative Principle - Grice claims that conversation is not just a bunch of random, disconnected utterances, but rather a cooperative effort with a mutually accepted direction, so it is governed by some rules that dictate what is appropriate to contribute. The primary one is to “make your conversational contribution such as is required, at the stage at which it occurs, by the accepted purpose or direction of the talk exchange in which you are engaged.” This is then broken down into four subcategories of maxims: Quantity, Quality, Relation, and Manner. The first rule, that of Quantity, says that you should provide as much detail or information as is required for the conversation and no more. The maxim of Quality obliges you to only say that which you believe to be true and have sufficient evidence for. The maxim of Relation is simply, “Be relevant,” and finally the maxim of Manner requires you to be perspicuous, that is, avoid obscurity of expression, avoid ambiguity, be brief, and be orderly. (Grice 1989, 26-7)
After delineating these rules of conversation, Grice moves on to finally show how they can function to create implicatures. He begins by explaining that someone can fail to fulfill these maxims through quietly violating them, opting out of following them, facing a clash between them, or openly flouting them. So if someone is able to fulfill a maxim and for some reason does not, but is still thought to be adhering to the Cooperative Principle, this leads to a conversational implicature. Specifically, there are three conditions for a speaker to conversationally imply that q by saying p: firstly, the speaker is presumed to be following the maxims (at least the Cooperative Principle), secondly, the supposition that the speaker thinks that q is required in order to make her saying p consistent with the first condition, and thirdly, the speaker thinks that her audience is able to work out that the supposition of the second condition is required, and the speaker would expect that her audience thinks that she thinks this. (Grice 1989, 30-31)
Because this is rather abstract and complicated, examples are very beneficial to shed light on this theory. Grice divides his examples into three groups, one of which is when no maxims are violated or it is not obvious that any have been. This could be when someone says ‘I am quite hungry’ and a hearer responds, ‘There is a cafe on the next block’ (the implicature is that the cafe is open and can provide food to satisfy the speaker’s hunger). Grice clarifies that the maxim of Relation is not broken, nor is any other, because the connection between these sentences is clear. His next group of examples is that in which a maxim is violated but the violation can be explained by a clash with another maxim, such as when a person asks ‘When is Hanukkah?’ and someone replies ‘Sometime in December.’ This implies that the hearer does not know when exactly Hanukkah is, since she has violated the maxim of Quantity by not providing enough information, and this could only be explained by her understanding that if she were to say more, she would be violating the maxim of Quality by saying something of which she does not possess knowledge. Finally, the last group of examples that Grice discusses is that in which maxims are exploited, that is, “flouted for the purpose of getting in a conversational implicature by means of something of the nature of a figure of speech.” This could be if someone is asked, ‘Do you want to go on a date with me?’ and her response is, ‘I have to go see a man about a horse.’ Here, she is exploiting the maxims of Quantity, since she failed to provide a response to the question, and of Relation, since she said something seemingly irrelevant, but through this she manages to imply that she does not wish to go on a date (or wants to avoid the question) because this is the only way for her response to make sense with the assumption that she is following the Cooperative Principle. (Grice 1989, 32-7)
I will now move on to analyze these ideas, specifically employing Jennifer Saul’s article in which she suggests that utterer-implicature and audience-implicature be added to Grice’s taxonomy of meaning. Saul claims that it is possible for a speaker to try to imply something but fail, and she gives what I think is a very good example as evidence for this: suppose you are asked to write a letter of reference for a terrible student, you assume that he is applying for a job in the field in which you taught him, and you write a letter about his skills completely unrelated to this field. You mean to imply that he should not be hired, but it turns out that he was coincidentally applying for a job in the field you wrote about, so the employer hires him immediately based on your glowing review, failing entirely to grasp your intended implicature. In addition, Saul describes audience-implicature, in which the audience takes something to be implicated that the speaker did not mean. (Saul 2002, 230-8) For example, someone might be at a bar, enjoying a pleasant conversation with another person she just met, and he asks her ‘Would you like to go on a date with me?’ She responds ‘I have to go see a man about a horse.’ What she means is that she is going to go buy them both a drink and will return shortly to accept his offer, but her conversational partner takes her to be implying that she does not wish to go on a date with him and in fact does not even wish to continue their present conversation, so he leaves. This is a case of when utterer-implicature does not align with audience-implicature, resulting in a misunderstanding, and I think it is important to be addressed in a general theory of conversational implicatures. I believe that these additions show that Grice’s original framework was incomplete, because it seems clear from Saul’s paper that oftentimes implicatures fail due to misinterpretations and simply the fact that neither the speaker nor the audience has complete control over the exchange and each relies on the other for unspoken communication, which will always be difficult on behalf of various human mishaps.
As a final note, I am slightly skeptical of Grice’s four maxims. I think that it is possible that they could all be boiled down to simply “Be relevant,” and this could be enough to explain all conversational implicatures. I think that his other three maxims do provide further insight into the rules that we typically follow in talk exchanges, but being relevant seems to be the only overarching rule that governs what is implied. An example that Grice would say is explained by a conflict between the maxims of Quantity and Quality, if I ask ‘What time is it?’ and you respond ‘It is evening’, could really be seen as a violation of relevance, because I asked for the time and you instead gave me the period of day, which is not an entirely relevant response to my question and allows me to infer that you do not know the exact time. However, as I said I think that Grice’s maxims are still helpful in that they provide a more detailed explanation of what is going on with the conversational implicature, but perhaps they are all subcategories of Relation.
In conclusion, I have in this paper reconstructed Grice’s arguments concerning implicature, including his distinction between what a speaker says, what is conventionally implied, and what is conversationally implied, and how his Cooperative Principle along with the four maxims of Quantity, Quality, Relation, and Manner work to allow conversational implicatures to function when the rules are exploited. I have also analyzed his theory in light of Saul’s expansion on it, and provided some thoughts as to the classification of his maxims. Overall, I think that Grice’s framework is a great starting point for further investigations into the topic, and Saul in particular has shown a few ways that it can be added onto to form a more robust account of meaning and implication.
