Peter Fawley
4/26/14
Period 2
The Curse of Diamonds


The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) has endured troubles ever since its independence in the mid 1960’s. The country has had its fair share of corrupt dictators and has suffered wars between different groups and countries. However, these problems did not arise from differences in customs or bad political ideology; the problems of this country can be traced back to a lifeless entity. The chief contributor to the problems that the Democratic Republic of the Congo has experienced in the past couple of decades has been the poor management of the abundant and valuable natural resources that are under its soil. The resources of this country fueled the First and Second Congo wars and continue to fuel fights between various groups, especially in eastern DRC (Tran). The resources of this country are both a blessing and a curse. The minerals have the potential to bring the DRC lots of profit and a better life for its people. But realistically, in a country that is so undeveloped, the resources act as a curse with the neverending fight for control.
To fully solve a problem, one needs to understand all aspects of the roots of the problem. To cleanse the Democratic Republic of the Congo of its corruption and violence, we must understand why this corruption is evident and from where it arises. Since the natural resources are the underlying contributors to the problems, it is important that we figure out a way to differently handle the resources so the corruption and violence can hopefully stop. This solution matters because at the present time the people of the DRC experience some of the most inhumane atrocities of the face of the earth. These atrocities will decline significantly if the problem with the natural resources is solved, so it is imperative and important that we solve the problem (Vircoulon).
Throughout history it has become evident that management of natural resources can be difficult and complex due to incongruent practices in the social, political, and economic sectors. Conflict prone societies like the DRC generate even more challenges and obstacles in the control of natural resources. The DRC is located in a part of Africa that is immensely rich in natural resources (Sen). The country is considered to possess the greatest wealth in natural resources out of any country in the world with a value of around $24 trillion (Rosenberg). To put this number in perspective, it is equal to the Gross Domestic Product of Europe and the United States of America combined. The resources of this country include diamond, coltan, gold, tin, and copper. Despite the value of all these resources, the economy of the DRC has been in constant decline since the 1980’s (Barouski). However good it may seem to have a tremendous amount of valuable natural resources, these ores bring with them violence and conflict and constitute one of the four traps keeping the DRC from becoming more advanced. When a country becomes too dependent on the profit of a single product, the other products and areas of manufacturing decrease until they are non existent. In 2005 it was announced that 90% of the GDP for this country was derived from raw minerals. This has resulted in the DRC’s citizens being among the poorest people in the world (Shah). 
After the DRC’s independence in the 1960’s, it was considered to be the most advanced country in Africa just behind South Africa due to its mining sector. Due to recent conflicts, mainly the First and Second Congo wars, the economic activity in this country has all but vanished and the country has become buried in debt (Rosenberg). What all these conflicts have in common is the underlying struggle of different stakeholders for control of the natural resources. Many foreign powers deny that they fund groups that are involved in the conflict out of greed for the resources even though ulterior motives are highly suspected (Bekoe). In fact, during the Second Congo War, all sides were accused of having commercial interests linked to the war even though none of them admitted to it. This can be equated to the motive to gain control of oil in the Middle East during the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. 
During periods of violence, mineral resources are not only looted from the original collectors by Congolese and foreign soldiers,  as well as civilians, but they are also extracted by soldiers who are locals organized by military commanders and foreign nationals (Johnson). Problems stemming from mining practices include disruption of families, mining-related illnesses, environmental damage, child-labor, and abuse of women including prostitution and rape (Rosenberg). In September 2010, the government banned mining in the east of the country, attempting to crack down on illegal organizations and corruption. However, these raw ores still contribute greatly to the internal conflicts and violence occurring in the DRC. Much of the finance sustaining the civil wars in Africa, especially in the DRC, is directly connected to Coltan profits (Bekoe). This violence has culminated in the deaths of over five million people and contributed to the malnutrition which affects around two-thirds of the people in the DRC.
The lack of regulation, and corruption, in the mining sector of this country have overwhelmingly fueled the conflicts in the eastern DRC. It is believed that one third of the diamonds travel through the informal and unregulated sector. Many multinational corporations receive profits from the wars and have developed schemes to plunder the natural resources by controlling public officials (Barouski). The UN released a report in late 2003 that named 125 countries, companies, and individuals that directly or indirectly influenced the conflict in the eastern DRC. Two of the most prominent members on this list are Uganda and Rwanda which, to this day, continue to wreak havoc in eastern DRC through armed groups out of greed for the natural resources (Bekoe).
The 1994 Rwandan Genocide resulted in the relocation of 700,000 refugees into the eastern parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Kulish). These displaced groups have grown and created factions over the past few decades that try to gain control of resource rich areas. One of these current factions is a group that goes by the name M23. This group is backed and funded by both Rwanda and Uganda and operates out of Northern Kivu, a resource rich area in northeastern DRC. M23 is known for being extremely violent and hostile towards the inhabitants in eastern DRC (Bekoe). They use rape as a strategy to intimidate the local people so they can control the mines around their villages. The group was formed so Uganda and Rwanda could use it as a proxy in order to gain control of mines in the DRC (Burnley). 
Elsewhere in the DRC, a rebel group by the name Mai-Mai Kata Katanga was formed to protect their territory in the north from other armed groups. However, in mid 2013 this group strayed from its principles and went on the offensive by attacking the provincial capital of Lubumbashi claiming thousands of lives and displacing more than 400,000 people throughout the province of Katanga (Burnley). Lubumbashi is a popular target because it is the mining hub of the DRC and many of the big mining organizations are located there (Shah). The continuing shift of control of natural resources between armed groups has made it increasingly difficult for these resources to be used to help the people.  Along with that, these groups have continued to corrupt and erode the government of the DRC and have caused the country to become extremely unsafe for its inhabitants.
Natural resources indirectly affect farmers of the southern portion of the DRC in a negative way in current times. With the absence of an alternative way to make money, ownership of land is essential for the livelihoods of people. This has led to conflicts between the Hema and Lendu people of the Ituri region in the DRC. To this date, these conflicts have claimed the lives of over 10,000 people and have displaced another 50,000 more (Gettleman). Until natural resources are better managed in a way to benefit these people, the conflicts in the Ituri region will continue to be waged. 
There are still gleams of hope regarding reform for mining practices in the DRC. New legislation called the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform Act has prohibited the sale of conflict minerals to the United States causing illegal companies to get permits and follow regulation so they can sell the products to a wider market (Tran). Cobalt, which is an important resource used to make parts of phones, computers, and televisions, has always been one of the main conflict minerals coming from the DRC. Many companies have begun to screen and monitor where the cobalt they receive is coming from to ensure it is not from an unregulated mining practice (Johnson).
To solve the issues that the natural resources cause and to fully eradicate the violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there will need to be a combination of foreign intervention and governmental reforms, along with mining restrictions and reforms (Zapata). One way to start is with influential UN intervention that does not threaten the national security, economic, and political interests of the Congolese government. The UN peacekeeping groups should force the armed rebel groups into ultimatums that will end their violence. By applying pressure to these groups, the UN will cause the rebel groups to fold or fight a war that they will quickly and inevitably lose (Kulish). Also, the DRC must strengthen its will for political reform regarding the use of natural resources. Legislation should be passed that emphasizes regulation of the natural resources so groups will not be able to freely control vast amounts of wealth. This will also increase the economic revenue for the country because the valuable resources will then be sold in a regulated sector. Political reform will therefore allow the DRC to take full advantage of its resources and kick start its economic growth (Mueller).
Another solution is to make companies that use conflict minerals---mainly electronics and jewelry companies---thoroughly trace and audit their supply chains to ensure that their products are not financing atrocities in eastern DRC (Vircoulon). In addition, it is critical to clean up the minerals trade in the DRC so that miners can work in decent conditions, and the mineral revenues can benefit communities instead of warlords. The certification system for minerals in the DRC and the region must be strengthened so that companies can purchase clean, conflict-free minerals from the DRC and the region (Mueller).
Trade restrictions and screening of resources will also play an integral part in reducing the availability of minerals used to finance rebel groups. Initiatives will be  passed that require mining companies to report where their supply of minerals came from, and how they obtained the minerals if they came from conflict zones. Currently there are a handful of laws like this at the national and international levels the cover accountability and certification of minerals (Kulish). The Congolese government needs to push this a step further and implement penalties if the minerals are found out to be “dirty.” 
There are also ways that the common person can help to quell the natural resource problem in the DRC. The majority of minerals that armed groups control and sell end up in the electronics and appliances that we use everyday. Because of the lack of transparency in the supply chain, we do not know if the electronics we buy were made from “clean” or “dirty” minerals. What we can do is demand that companies stop using conflict minerals in their appliances or threaten to boycott those appliances. This will help to end the funding of rebel groups and ultimately, the conflict (Laing).
The problems that natural resources cause in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have been very evident and  well documented in the past few decades. The violence in the DRC will continue to ravage its people until these resources are managed and regulated. Instability, corruption, and violence have been the results of this poor management, but my outlook is positive because this problem can be fixed (Vircoulon).
I understand that the problem associated with the lack of regulation of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is complicated and complex. But I believe it is paramount to educate the common person about the atrocities and suffering conflict minerals bring if we are helping to fuel the fire by purchasing electronics with “dirty” minerals. I for one did not think I could possibly be helping a Congolese warlord by buying a new iphone 5 at the Apple store. We should feel morally obligated to help in some sort of way after contributing to the problems for so long.